Add network tests in advanced docs (#362)
ObolNetwork/obol-docs: docs/advanced/test-command.md

---
sidebar_position: 1
description: Test networking between Charon dependant services
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# Network tests

:::caution

> The charon test command is in alpha state and should be used with caution on testnets only.

Reviewer: Is this really needed? In the end the test command never even interacts with real keys, its purpose is to be used before even creating a DV.

Reviewer: I see your point, though running test commands doesn't really do any harm.

Maybe we can reword it mentioning something along the lines of "beta software, YMMV"?

Author: Changed it to:
`The charon test command is in alpha state and is still in development. It can not do any harm, but there is no guarantee it is stable and working as expected.`

:::

> Charon test command is evaluates effectiveness of the network between the machine it is running on and the targeted external service - other Charon peers, beacon node(s) or validator client. It prints a performance report to the standard output (can be omitted by with `quiet` flag) and a machine-readable TOML format of the report if `output-toml` flag is set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Charon test command evaluates network performance and effectiveness of the machine it is running on and the targeted external service - other Charon peers, beacon node(s) or validator client. It prints a performance report to the standard output (can be omitted by with `quiet` flag) and a machine-readable TOML format of the report if `output-toml` flag is set.
```

## Peers

> Run tests towards other Charon peers to evaluate the effectiveness of a potential cluster setup. The command sets up a libp2p node, similarly to what Charon originally does. This test command **has to be running simultanuously with other peers**. After the node is up it has some await time for other peers to get their nodes up and running, retrying every 3 seconds. The libp2p node connects to relays (configurable with `p2p-relays` flag) and to other libp2p nodes via TCP. Other peer nodes are discoverable by using their ENRs. Note that for a peer to be successfully discovered, it needs to be connected to the same relay. After completion of the test suite the libp2p node stays alive (duration configurable with `keep-alive` flag) for other peers to continue testing against it. The node can be forcefully stopped as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run tests towards other Charon peers to evaluate the effectiveness of a potential cluster setup. The command sets up a libp2p node, similarly to what Charon originally does. This test command **has to be running simultaneously with other peers**. After the node is up it waits for other peers to get their nodes up and running, retrying connection every 3 seconds. The libp2p node connects to relays (configurable with `p2p-relays` flag) and to other libp2p nodes via TCP. Other peer nodes are discoverable by using their ENRs. Note that for a peer to be successfully discovered, it needs to be connected to the same relay. After completion of the test suite the libp2p node stays alive (duration configurable with `keep-alive` flag) for other peers to continue testing against it. The node can be forcefully stopped as well.
```

> The node can be forcefully stopped as well.

We should explain how to do that I think (I know it's a simple ctrl-c, but users will be users).

To be able to establish direct connection, you have to ensure:

> - Your machine is publicly accessible on the internet or atleast a specific port is.

Reviewer 2: atleast => at least

- You add flag `p2p-tcp-address` (i.e.: `127.0.0.1:9001`) flag and the port specified in it is free and publicly accessible.
- You add the flag `p2p-external-ip` (i.e.: `8.8.8.8`) and specify your public ip.

> If all points are satisfied by you and the other peers, you should be able to establish a direct TCP connection between each other. Note that a relay is still required, as establishing direct connection is facilitated by it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If all points are satisfied by you and the other peers, you should be able to establish a direct TCP connection between each other. Note that a relay is still required, as it is used for peer discovery. 
```

### Pre-requisites

> - [Create ENR](http://localhost:3000/docs/next/charon/charon-cli-reference#creating-an-enr-for-charon).

Reviewer: Don't specify localhost here. 

@OisinKyne can we do relative linking in Docusaurus somehow?

Author: Ouf, missed this one, thanks! Added relative link by `../charon/charon-cli-reference#creating-an-enr-for-charon`

```

### Run with Docker

```shell
docker run -v /Users/obol/charon/.charon:/opt/charon/.charon obolnetwork/charon:v1.0.0-rc1 alpha test peers \
  --enrs="enr:-HW4QNDXi9MzdH9Af65g20jDfelAJ0kJhclitkYYgFziYHXhRFF6JyB_CnVnimB7VxKBGBSkHbmy-Tu8BJq8JQkfptiAgmlkgnY0iXNlY3AyNTZrMaEDBVt5pk6x0A2fjth25pjLOEE9DpqCG-BCYyvutY04TZs,enr:-HW4QO2vefLueTBEUGly5hkcpL7NWdMKWx7Nuy9f7z6XZInCbFAc0IZj6bsnmj-Wi4ElS6jNa0Mge5Rkc2WGTVemas2AgmlkgnY0iXNlY3AyNTZrMaECR9SmYQ_1HRgJmNxvh_ER2Sxx78HgKKgKaOkCROYwaDY"
```

## Beacon

Run tests towards beacon node(s), evaluating the effectiveness of a potential connection of a Charon node running on the same machine.

### Pre-requisites

- Running beacon node(s) towards which tests will be executed.

### Run

```shell
charon alpha test beacon \
  --endpoints="https://ethereum-holesky-beacon-api.publicnode.com,https://ethereum-sepolia-beacon-api.publicnode.com"
```

### Run with Docker

```shell

> docker run obolnetwork/charon:v1.0.0-rc1 alpha test beacon \

Reviewer 2: Maybe we shall always provide only docker commands? If I am not mistaken other documentation does just this.

Author: I see in some places [like here](https://docs.obol.tech/docs/advanced/quickstart-builder-api#charon) simply charon command is used

Reviewer: +1 on always providing docker commands in this case.

Author: I think what @pinebit meant was to exclude non-docker commands

Reviewer 2: I don't mind providing both in according with what other articles do.
